What is HTTP?

Introduction:
In websites there is communication between server and client. Means we(the client). The communication start by client by sending request to the server.

When websites came first(before browsers) they were accessed by command line interface, Means we send request to server by typing commands in command line interface. 

But there should be condition or rule written in server which accepts request from client(by internet) and then respond according to the request that client send.


Early web and its challenges:
Suppose that there were firstly 3 websites, web A, web B, web C. So there should be 3 rules or conditions means each rule or condition for each website written in server which accepts request from client and then respond according to the request.

Suppose web A write in server that if request is (Req:Home) then return home page.
web B write in server that if request is (Need-Main) then return home page.
web C write in server that if request is (Send>home) then return home page.
This gives arise to a problem that each website has different conditions or rules to access there home page. 
By which client have to learn each website rules or conditions to access there home page. Which is not good for client if there are thousands of websites.

So to solve this problem HTTP came into existence, HTTP is a format to write request. Which means client should only need to know what to access and from which server to access, but request format is same.

When we write any url in our browsers , it is converted into HTTP request by browser. Which is then send to server. Server then check and respond.
and if you might have noticed that when we write url Suppose https://www.youtube.com/ there is / after .com which is information of what we want to get from server and in all the website server nowadays there is written if request has / then return home(index.html) page.

We learned about what is HTTP now it's time to look how HTTP request looks like,

GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: www.example.com

1. GET: The HTTP method, indicating the action the client wants (in this case, to get a resource).
2. /index.html: The path to the resource (in this case, the homepage of the website).
3. HTTP/1.1: The version of the HTTP protocol being used.
4. Host: www.example.com: The domain name of the server.

then server return code for e.g.

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: text/html
Content-Length: 1024

<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<body>
</body>
</html>

1. HTTP/1.1 200 OK: The server indicates that the request was successful (status code 200).
2. Content-Type: The type of content being sent (in this case, HTML).
3. Content-Length: The size of the response body (1024 bytes).


Summary:
HTTP is a format of request which is used by client to send request to server. Which is then responded by server.

